# Project 4

## Using Machine Learning for Stock Price Predictions 

<u>Collaborators:</u>

1. Miguel Ari - https://github.com/Miguel-Ari
2. Grace Barnett - https://github.com/gbarn777
3. Ivan Galeano - https://github.com/igaleano2
4. Cameron Leslie - https://github.com/CameronLeslie1
5. Angela Narag- https://github.com/angelanarag
6. Tanaz Sayan - 


<u>Project Description:</u>

The objective of this project is to leverage historical stock data from Yahoo Financial and employ machine learning techniques to forecast future stock prices. By comparing the performance of various models, including LSTM neural network, linear regression, random forest, and ARIMA - we aim to validate our thesis that a neural network model would yield superior accuracy in predicting stock prices. Through the analysis of key metrics and comparison of our predicted prices vs. actual closing prices, our goal is to identify the model that consistently provides the most accurate stock price forecasts, providing valuable insights for investors and traders in the financial market.


<u>Thesis:</u>  

* We hypothesized that the neural network model would yield superior accuracy in predicting stock price and would outperform the other models due to its ability to capture complex patterns and nonlinear relationships in the data.

<u>Approach:</u> 

* Using the Yahoo Finance library, we retrieved historical stock data on Goldman Sachs (Ticker: GS).
* We created and compared the performance of 6 different models, including linear regression, random forest, and ARIMA, and LSTM neural network to validate our thesis.
* Each model was assessed based on their ability to accurately forecast stock prices using historical data.
* By comparing the predictions generated by different models, we aimed to identify the model that consistently provided the most accurate stock price forecasts.


<u>Key Metrics:</u> 

* We evaluated the models based on metrics such as mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), mean squared error (MSE) and mean absolute error (MAE) to quantify the prediction accuracy.


<u>Data:</u>

1. Daily stock closing prices for Goldman Sach (Ticker: GS) from Yahoo Finance
    * Majority of the models used at minimum 3 years worth of data ending June 1, 2023
    * Depending on the model, historical data was increased
2. Federal Funds Effective Rate from FRED
    * Downloaded the rate from the Federal Reserve Economic Data online database
3. Bollinger Bands
    * Calculated the Bollinger Bands based on the Goldman Sachs Historical Price Data
    * Bollinger Bands are used to assess price volatility and identify potential price reversal points in financial markets


<u>Models:</u>

1. Linear Regression
    * MAPE: 1.59%
    * Dataset - Goldman Sachs daily Closing Prices only
    * Date Range - June 2020 to June 2023
2. Random Forest
    * MAPE: 1.45%
    * Dataset - Goldman Sachs daily Closing Prices only
    * Date Range - June 2020 to June 2023
3. ARIMA
    * MAPE: 1.32%
    * Dataset - Goldman Sachs daily Closing Prices only
    * Date Range - May 1995 to June 2023
4. LSTM Neural Network - Stock Closing Price only
    * MAPE: 1.84%
    * Dataset - Goldman Sachs daily Closing Prices only
    * Date Range - January 2019 to May 2023
5. LSTM Neural Network - Stock Closing Price and Federal Funds Effective Rate (Market Indicators)
    * MAPE: 1.34%
    * Dataset - Goldman Sachs daily Closing Prices and the daily Federal Funds Effective Rate from FRED
    * Date Range - January 2019 to May 2023
6. LSTM Neural Network - Stock Closing Price and Technical Indicators: Volume, Bollinger Bands 
    * MAPE: 1.19%
    * Dataset - Goldman Sachs daily Closing Price, daily Stock Volume, Bollinger Bands: Middle, Upper and Lower bands
    * Date Range - February 2016 to May 2023


<u>Conclusion:</u>

* Based on the performance metrics of each model, the LSTM neural network (Model 6) had the best MAPE value. 
* However, ARIMA model, provided that it only used Closing Prices (from 1995 to 2023) came close. 
* LSTM model is better suited to predict the stock market given that It excels at capturing nonlinear relationships, allowing it to capture complex patterns and relationships between stock market features.
* Stock market behavior is influenced by numerous factors, including economic indicators, geopolitical events, investor sentiment, and unforeseen events. ML models may struggle to capture the full complexity and interplay of these factors.

